This animation explains requirements for accessible
bathing facilities in the ADA and ABA Standards.
These Standards provide specifications for
transfer showers, roll-in showers, and bathtubs.
At least one shower or bathtub must comply
in bathing facilities required to be accessible.
Requirements for transfer showers allow users
with disabilities, including those who use
wheelchairs, to approach the stall, operate
controls from outside, and position for transfer
to shower seats.
Grab bars opposite the seat and shallow thresholds,
one half inch maximum high, facilitate transfer
from wheelchairs and other mobility aids.
Shower spray units must be located on the
side wall opposite the seat.
Transfer shower stalls must be 3 feet wide
and 3 feet deep, measured to the center points
of walls.
These are absolute, not minimum, dimensions
so that grab bars and shower controls are
within reach from the seat.
Clear floor space at the compartment must
be at least 36 inches deep and 48 inches long.
The length is measured from the control wall
so that the clear floor space extends beyond
the seat wall at least 12 inches.
This clearance provides space to operate shower
controls and position for transfer.
The additional space beyond the seat wall
allows proper alignment with the seat for
transfer.
The front edge of shower seats must extend
15 to 16 inches from the seat wall.
Gaps at the rear edge cannot exceed 2 and
a half inches.
The seat must extend from the back wall to
a point within 3 inches of the compartment
entry.
The side edge cannot be more than 1 and a
half inches from the back wall.
The Standards also permit seats to be L-shaped.
Under this option, a portion of the seat 14
to 15 inches wide extends 22 to 23 inches
from the seat wall.
Roll-in showers are sized to accommodate mobility
aids and shower chairs without having to transfer
to a seat.
They must be at least 30 inches deep and 60
inches long.
Grab bars are required on all three sides.
Shower spray units and controls can be located
on the back wall or either side wall in stalls
not equipped with seats.
Clear floor space in front of the shower at
least 30 inches by 60 inches provides room
to maneuver into and out of the stall and
for turning.
Transitions at showers must be smooth to accommodate
wheeled mobility aids.
If a threshold is provided, it cannot exceed
half an inch and must be properly beveled
on both sides.
Solutions such as trench drains that control
water without a threshold will provide easier
access.
Folding seats can be provided in roll-in showers
and are a good idea since they provide the
option to transfer from mobility aids.
They are also helpful to people with limited
balance or standing ability.
If provided, a seat must be a folding type
that is permanently attached to a side wall.
Grab bars are dimensioned so that they do
not overlap the seat.
The shower spray unit and controls must be
located on the back wall within 27 inches
from the seat wall so that they are usable
from the seat.
It is advisable, though not required, that
a foot of additional clear floor space be
provided beyond the seat wall to allow more
flexibility in positioning for transfer to
the seat, similar to the configuration required
at transfer showers.
A lavatory can overlap a portion of the clear
floor space, but must be located on the side
opposite the seat so that transfer space remains
unobstructed.
No other fixture is permitted to overlap the
shower clearance.
An alternative to the standard roll-in shower
is permitted that allows the entry side to
be partially enclosed.
The shower entry must be at least 36 inches
wide.
The shower compartment is required to be 36
inches deep absolute.
Grab bars are required on the back wall and
on the side wall farthest from the entry.
The shower spray unit and controls also must
be located on this side wall unless a seat
is provided.
This type of shower, like the standard roll-in
shower, can have a folding seat.
Seats must be mounted on the front wall.
This location provides clear space next to
the seat for transfer.
The grab bar on the side wall is dimensioned
so that it does not overlap the seat.
The shower spray unit and controls must be
located on the side wall 27 inches maximum
from the seat wall, or they can be mounted
on the back wall opposite the seat within
15 inches on either side of the seat centerline.
Placement on the back wall is allowed only
when a seat is provided.
The Standards also address access to bathtubs.
Tub controls are located toward the open side
so that they are usable from outside the tub.
A removable in-tub seat or a permanent seat
at the head end is required.
Removable seats must attach securely when
in place so that they do not move or shift
during use.
Grab bars on the back and side walls provide
support in transferring to and using seats.
If a permanent seat is provided, a grab bar
on the head end wall is not provided because
it would interfere with use of the seat.
The dual grab bars on the back wall must extend
to the edge of the seat so that they are usable
from the seat.
These grab bars facilitate entry into the
tub from the seat.
The required clear floor space at tubs must
be at least 30 inches wide and extend the
length of the tub.
If a permanent seat is provided, the clear
floor space must extend at least 12 inches
beyond the head end wall to allow proper positioning
for transfer.
A lavatory can overlap this clearance at the
control end only.
The knee and toe space required below lavatories
also accommodates pull-up space at controls.
It is advisable to keep lavatories outside
the tub clearance for easier access to tub
controls.
No other fixture can overlap tub clearances.
Further guidance on accessible bathing facilities
and other requirements in the ADA and ABA
Standards is available from the U.S. access
board.
This animation was developed by the U.S. access
board in cooperation with the federal agencies
that issue the ADA and ABA Standards.